docs/user/input.md, before:

# Input

This describes the main input files of SNVPhyl.  Please see the [Usage][] documentation for details on running with these input files.

# Reference Genome

The reference genome is used for the reference mapping stage of the pipeline.  Ideally, this should represent a closed and finished genome very close to the other genomes to examine.  When such as genome is not already available, it is possible to use a *de novo* assembled genome as a reference.  However, with a *de novo* assembled genome there exists a greater possibilty of sequence alignment issues and missing data.

An example reference genome looks like.

![reference-genome][]

# Invalid Positions masking file

The invalid positions file is used to mask out regions on the reference genome with variants from being included in the phylogeny.  The format of the invalid positions file is a [BED][]-like tab-deliminated file defining the chromosome/contig/fasta sequence name and the start and end coordinates to exclude.

```
#Chromosome    Start    End
reference      1        10
```

# Sequence Reads

The sequence reads are the set of reads to use for mapping and variant calling.  The provided workflow currently only supports paired-end sequence reads.  These should be in [FASTQ][] format.  Within Galaxy these should be structured within a paired-end dataset collection.

![galaxy-paired-sequence-reads][]

Please see the [Preparing Sequence Reads][] documentation for details on how to structure the data.

[Usage]: usage.md
[reference-genome]: images/reference-genome.png
[FASTQ]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FASTQ_format
[galaxy-paired-sequence-reads]: images/galaxy-paired-sequence-reads.png
[Preparing Sequence Reads]: usage.md#preparing-sequence-reads
[BED]: http://genome.ucsc.edu/FAQ/FAQformat#format1

Commit message:

Added reference to fastqsanger data type

docs/user/input.md, after:

# Input

This describes the main input files of SNVPhyl.  Please see the [Usage][] documentation for details on running with these input files.

# Reference Genome

The reference genome is used for the reference mapping stage of the pipeline.  Ideally, this should represent a closed and finished genome very close to the other genomes to examine.  When such as genome is not already available, it is possible to use a *de novo* assembled genome as a reference.  However, with a *de novo* assembled genome there exists a greater possibilty of sequence alignment issues and missing data.

An example reference genome looks like.

![reference-genome][]

# Invalid Positions masking file

The invalid positions file is used to mask out regions on the reference genome with variants from being included in the phylogeny.  The format of the invalid positions file is a [BED][]-like tab-deliminated file defining the chromosome/contig/fasta sequence name and the start and end coordinates to exclude.

```
#Chromosome    Start    End
reference      1        10
```

# Sequence Reads

The sequence reads are the set of reads to use for mapping and variant calling.  The provided workflow currently only supports paired-end sequence reads.  These should be in [FASTQ][] format.  Within Galaxy these should be imported with the **fastqsanger** data type and structured within a paired-end dataset collection.

![galaxy-paired-sequence-reads][]

Please see the [Preparing Sequence Reads][] documentation for details on how to structure the data.

[Usage]: usage.md
[reference-genome]: images/reference-genome.png
[FASTQ]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FASTQ_format
[galaxy-paired-sequence-reads]: images/galaxy-paired-sequence-reads.png
[Preparing Sequence Reads]: usage.md#preparing-sequence-reads
[BED]: http://genome.ucsc.edu/FAQ/FAQformat#format1
